Hello, everyone.
My name is Aaftaib Munshi,
and I'm going to talk about OpenCL and
using OpenCL to do data parallel
computing on the GPU and CPU.
[Transcript missing]
So the OpenCL specification has been
developed in collaboration with AMD,
Imagination Technologies, Intel,
and NVIDIA.
And so this is something that
we work very closely with them,
with these vendors,
to define something that's really robust.
Robust in its feature set and
robust in its ease of use.
It has to be really easy for people
to use for this to be successful.
and in addition,
Synchronos is an industry-wide consortium
which includes members that I had
talked about in the previous slide.
and other developers have developed
standards such as OpenGL and OpenGL ES.
Apple has released a specification
to Khronos and a new compute working
group has been started with the goal
of taking this and ratifying it to be
an open standard that will run across
multiple devices and multiple platforms.
[Transcript missing]
What are the goals or the requirements
that OpenCL had to answer or solve?
Well, the first thing is, you know,
today we use CPUs for doing
certain things and we use
GPUs for doing certain things.
We want to actually leverage all the
computational resources in the system.
So we want to view
CPUs and GPUs as peers.
Now I talked about, you know,
the 8800GT has 504 gigaflops and the
Mac Pro CPU 8 core has 96 gigaflops.
Well,
why not take advantage of both of them?
You get 600 gigaflops.
And there are certain tasks
a CPU is really good for and
certain tasks a GPU is good for.
You may actually want to
design the algorithms that
take advantage of both of them.
And we want to be able to do that.
And so OpenCL allows you to do that.
The parallel programming model
has to be really easy to use.
And I mean,
one of the reasons why a GPU is really
a good example of a successful parallel
computing model is that if you just
think of it in terms of 3D graphics,
I have a vertex shader,
a fragment shader,
I really write one shader and then
the data gets executed with a bunch
of vertices or a bunch of pixels.
And I don't really have to worry
about how parallelism happens.
It just has taken care of for me.
And we want to do something very similar,
but apply it to functions.
So it's great I have the GPU doing
really amazing computational power,
but I'm trying to move my algorithm
that used to run on the CPU to the GPU.
I want to see consistent
numerical behavior.
And so we need to be able to specify the
accuracy of floating-point computations.
So when I do an addition, subtract,
or multiplication of the GPU,
I expect to see the same
result as I would on the CPU.
And we actually need to
take it a little further.
We have a bunch of math functions
that are defined in math.h today.
We want to be able to support
that on any computer device,
but also define what is
the minimum error bound.
Because if I am using the
GPU for computations and
the CPU for computations,
I need a library that clearly defines
what the minimum error bound is so
I can design my algorithm accordingly.
So that's really important.
Numerical accuracy is really important.
And then we can use OpenCL as the
vehicle to drive future hardware
requirements for compute as future
revisions of OpenCL come into play.
So where can I use OpenCL?
Any data parallel algorithm.
Okay, next slide, I'll talk about what
I mean by data parallel.
Any data parallel algorithm,
that's a performance critical path.
So some of the domains where you
would encounter data parallel
algorithms would be physics simulation.
Let's say you're doing rigid body
collision or fluid simulation.
Image processing is a natural, you know,
false writing.
I don't need to explain that.
Signal processing, FFTs, data parallel,
video audio encoding, math libraries,
you know, BLAS, LAPAC could totally run
on the GPU and the CPU.
Non-traditional graphics,
restoration techniques like ray tracing,
you know, financial modeling,
medical imaging, the list goes on and on.
This is just a small sub-sample of...
and many more.
So, what is data parallel computing?
In general, parallel computing can be
classified into two subcategories:
task parallelism and data parallelism.
What do I mean by task parallelism?
Well,
let's say I have a library that operates
on numbers and I have an algorithm
that produces the sum of the numbers.
I have an algorithm that computes
the min and max and another
algorithm that produces the median.
So, these are independent tasks
or functions and they can
actually operate in parallel.
And in the example I just gave,
there is no dependencies between
them and they can actually
be executed in parallel.
But as a programmer,
I have to really think about how do
I break these things into multiple
tasks which can execute in parallel.
There may be cases where
there are dependencies.
For example,
let's say I want to generate a histogram
and then I want to take the output of
the histogram to do some tone mapping.
Well, I cannot execute the tone mapping
in parallel to the histogram.
There is a dependency that the
histogram task has to complete
first before I do tone mapping.
So I need to basically -- when
I write something that's going
to be task parallel in nature,
I need to carefully think,
break up these tasks and provide
the -- define the dependencies and
then create the parallel model.
That's what I mean by task parallelism.
In OpenCL, you can actually do that.
And each task can actually
be data parallel in nature.
So in the example I just gave
you about summing the integers.
We're going to write a task parallel.
We're going to talk about how that would
be described as a data parallel example.
So they can coexist together.
But what is data parallel computing?
Well,
if I have a function that is actually
operating on multiple data elements
and the operation on each of the data
elements can be executed in parallel,
that's what I mean by
data parallel computing.
And that's basically been the most
successful model of parallel computing.
Traditionally most
supercomputers use that model.
So let me describe an example.
Let's look at the scalar code here.
I want to multiply a number in A,
an array A, which has n entries,
with another number in B,
corresponding index in B,
and the product I want
to store in result.
Well, if I were to write scalar code,
it would just be a for loop.
If I were to write a
data parallel version,
well, if you look at the code,
each multiplication for any entry in
A and B can actually execute in parallel.
So if I could create n
independent units of execution,
where n is the size of the array here,
then I can execute all
of them in parallel.
And so that's what I mean
by data parallel computing.
Well, let's take another example,
a little more complex.
Well, let's take the sum of all integers.
So if I wanted to sum all integers,
then it's basically for loop,
which sums and produces a result.
Let's look at how you would
describe that as a data parallel.
And this is just one example,
one way you would do it.
There are many ways of doing this.
Well, let's say I have-- so
the array of integers,
and I have m threads, in this case,
eight threads.
Oops, there's nothing there.
Sorry.
In this case, eight threads.
Then each thread generates a partial sum.
So in this example,
thread 0 takes the sum of minus
2 and 1 and produces minus 1.
Thread 1 takes the sum of 10
and 5 and produces 15 and so on.
So at the end of the first
instance of running this code,
I have eight partial sums.
OK.
Then I can actually loop together and
now take four of those eight threads.
And produce four partial sums.
And then take two of those threads
and produce two partial sums.
So finally, I'll end up with something
that has two partial sums.
And then I can use the last thread,
the first thread,
to generate the final result.
So this is one example of how
you would do data parallel.
So you have the first main
loop and then a log n loop.
So what is the data parallel
compute model in OpenCL?
So define your computation domain,
i.e., how many units of execution
can operate in parallel on the
data that your function is using.
We call them threads,
but these are basically
just elements of execution,
the fine-grained in nature.
They're not like P-threads.
So that computation domain in
OpenCL is called global thread.
So in the example we talked about where
we just multiplied one array with another
and the array was n elements in size,
I would spawn n threads of
computation because they can
all be executed in parallel.
If there is no communication
between these threads,
which was in the case when
I multiplied one number with another,
I don't care.
I shouldn't have to care how the compute
device goes and parallelizes that.
And OpenCL refers to
this as implicit mapping.
And so the mapping,
you just specify how many
independent threads of execution
you want and OpenCL will go figure
it out how to map that and execute
that on the compute device.
In the example where I gave
the sum of all integers,
I needed to know how many threads
were working because they were
sharing information as they
were generating partial sums.
That is an example of what
I call explicit mapping.
So in there,
you really need to know how many
threads are working together.
And we call that a thread group.
So thread group has a special property
that the threads that are in the
thread group that are operating on the
data can communicate with each other,
which they needed to in the
case of the sum of all integers.
Because you needed to share
the partial sums together.
So they can synchronize,
they can coordinate and
communicate with each other.
And these multiple thread
groups can execute in parallel.
And they can execute in parallel
on the same compute unit in a
compute device or across multiple
compute units in a compute device.
So this is a high level
architecture overview.
Well, how do I use OpenCL?
[Transcript missing]
Next thing, memory objects.
Well,
there are two kinds of memory objects.
The first is array.
It's basically very similar to something
that you do when you do a malloc.
You get a pointer.
So in an array, you get a pointer.
It's a linear collection of elements.
You can reference each
element using a pointer.
The thing to note is, you know, on a CPU,
the reads and writes will be cached,
but on a GPU, typically,
it won't be cached.
And so there are performance
implications of that which you need to
remember or recognize when you write
your compute kernels or functions.
and then 2D images, sorry, images are,
there are two types, 2D and 3D.
And there are, you can,
the difference between an image and an
array can be classified as the following.
In the image, the data is stored in
a non-linear format,
so you do not get a pointer and
cannot directly access the elements.
So there are built-in functions that
the OpenCL language will allow you
to specify what you want to read,
where you want to read and
where you want to write.
In addition to that,
you also get what we call a sampler,
so controls that dictate or determine
how you want to read from an image.
So given a 2D coordinate for
a 2D image in an XY or a 3D
coordinate for a 3D image XYZ,
you can also specify how to convert
that to the actual position in the image
using what we call addressing mode,
which is very similar to what GL,
OpenGL has,
and the filter mode if you want
to do a bilinear filter or not.
And the last object, well, the function,
the data parallel function that we
have is called a compute kernel.
So here's an example.
So ignore some of the tokens
like _kernel and _global for now,
and I will talk about that.
So it just looks like C code.
And a program would be
analogous to a dynamic library.
It has a bunch of functions.
Some of them are exported.
So the functions that are declared with
the kernel qualifier are your exported
functions that you can actually call.
So how does one write compute kernels?
Well,
we want to make sure there's something
people are very familiar with.
And so the OpenCL C is
basically derived from C99,
okay?
And has additions to it,
and some of the additions
are vector data types.
So you can add -- and vector
data types can be two component,
four component, eight component,
up to 16 components for, you know,
integer and float types.
And you can do all your basic
operations you would do,
like if you say A plus B,
it works for a vector type as
it would for a scalar type.
Then there are image types,
so you can actually use image data
types and reference them and call the
built-in functions to read and write.
There are address and
function qualifiers.
The function qualifier that only
exists today is the kernel qualifier,
which is basically something that
tells us that it's a compute kernel.
And address qualifiers,
I will talk about that in a few slides.
And there's a rich suite
of built-in functions.
So all the math functions that you
would see today in C99 are supported.
There is functions for doing
synchronization that you would
need for threads in a thread group.
There are atomic functions,
there are conversion functions to
convert from one data type to another,
like into a float and so on, okay?
So let's take an example.
Remember the sum of all integers?
So this was the first loop.
So what would that code look like?
So there's the underscore underscore
kernel qualifier that says dpsum and
there was the input array which is called
a and the temp sum is basically the array
that will hold the partial sums together.
And finally I'll store
the result in result.
So ignore the global and
local qualifiers for now.
So each thread is identified by a
unique ID and it has a global ID.
So if you had n global
threads you had spawned,
each gets a unique ID which
can be one dimensional,
two dimensional, and three dimensional.
And that has an advantage and we'll talk
about that in the next example I give.
And each thread in a thread
group which is the explicit
working group together that works
together has a unique ID as well.
So we generate the partial sums here.
The first partial sum.
So we'll have eight of them.
And like I said in the example
I gave then you loop over until you
finally get two partial sums and then
thread zero computes the final sum.
So here is what the code looks like.
So the first loop was getting
a partial sum across n threads,
then we summed the partial sums,
and then we generated the final sum.
Let's take another example.
Let's say I want to do an image
filter where I want to just do
a reflection across the Y-axis.
And in this case I have an image.
So each element actually
in this particular filter,
since I'm doing a reflect,
can operate independently.
And in this, so each element or pixel in
the image can actually be an
independent unit of execution.
So the threads I want to spawn here would
be the width times height of the image.
Well,
I think it would be better to describe
this not as a one-dimensional problem
but as a two-dimensional problem.
Because I can actually,
if I have a two-dimensional identifier,
I can actually use that identifier as
my coordinate to get into the image.
And that's, you know, you can do that.
And so you call read image to read.
And then, you know,
the right reflected to the
reflection and then the right.
Well, with image, what happens is,
you know, the underlying data format
can be different from,
but when you read or write, you know,
the output of the read
is always four floats.
And the input to the right
And automatic conversion happens.
Well,
what if I already know what the format
is and I don't want to use images?
So let's say it's RGBA 8888,
8 bits per pixel.
You know, can I use something else?
Yeah, you can.
In this case,
you can use the Clarison array.
and many more.
You have many choices available.
These are not optimized examples,
so don't go and write this
and expect full performance.
So let's talk about,
remember in some of the
slides we were talking about
global and underscore local.
So what are these things?
Well,
in OpenCL we have memory address spaces.
And this describes a different
memory subsystems or hierarchy that
may exist in the computer device.
On some computer devices they may be
collapsed and I'll talk about that.
So first thing is remember each thread
is an independent unit of execution
and has what is called its own memory,
what we call private memory.
Then the threads that are in the thread
group that want to be able to share data,
well they need some buffers to
be able to share data with and
that's called local memory.
And local memory, so in the case on GPUs,
the local memory would be actually
a user managed cache where your
computer is going to manage it.
Whereas on the CPU it's just basically
cached memory that maps to your DRAM.
And then there's global memory,
which is where your input and output
data finally get read from or stored.
And there's a property of global memory.
Let's take an example.
Let's say I want to do
a convolution filter.
The filter weight can be stored
in global memory but it's
basically just being read.
I'm not modifying it.
And it has a unique property that
each thread as it's operating,
applying the filter,
it wants to read the same filter weight.
So wouldn't it be nice if there
was a way to be able to do that?
was a way to be able to cache that
and be able to access that really,
really fast.
And that's what the constant
qualifier is telling,
indicating.
So that tells the OpenCL compiler
that there is a unique
property behind this constant.
And these memory address spaces
can only be specified to pointers.
So anything you declare as a pointer,
you need to tell us what
the memory address space is.
OK, so we looked at the high-level
architecture overview.
We looked at what the objects are.
We looked at how to
write computer kernels.
So I wrote a computer kernel.
I think it's going to
perform really well.
Well, how do I get the computer
device to execute it?
What code do I need to
write on the host to execute
[Transcript missing]
Now, I want to load my program.
Well, so I have my source, I load it,
I build the executable,
and I then create the kernel.
CreateKernel is basically very
similar to if you do a load library,
then you call get proc address to
get your address of the function.
That's effectively what it's doing.
Now, before I call my function,
so when I make a function call,
I call the function,
I specify the arguments.
I specify the arguments
in OpenCL using CL,
something called CL set kernel args.
So in this case,
the input arguments are the three memory
objects I created and their sizes are
the size of the memory object type.
So all memory objects that are created
on the host side are opaque handles and
they get mapped to the right pointers by
the OpenCL framework when actually the
function gets executed on the device.
So on the host side,
you never have to deal with pointers.
[Transcript missing]
All right, great.
I executed my kernel.
I got data.
I want to visualize that data now.
So how do I do that?
I'm going to use OpenGL.
Well,
so how does OpenCL work with OpenGL?
we want to make sure that any GL objects,
such as a texture or a buffer object,
vertex or pixel,
can actually be used as a
CL array or a text image,
which you can.
Well, not only that,
we want to make sure that they
both point to the same bits.
We don't want to be doing any copying,
so sharing has to be really,
really efficient.
So OpenCL can generate some data which
can actually be directly used as the
input to GL without requiring any copy,
and that's what it's implemented.
So how do you share these resources?
Well, the first thing you need to
make sure that the GL context is
created using a CGL share group.
You want to make sure that the compute
device group that you are creating
with CL points to that same thing,
which is basically saying I'm
going to point to the same devices.
And when I allocate my arrays or images,
I use this flag called
memalloc_reference,
which basically says that
I'm not going to allocate any
data or memory behind this,
but I'm going to use whatever
memory has been allocated by GL.
And then sharing is very easy.
I attach, so I can attach to a GL image
or a GL buffer object,
and then use that as an argument
in my CL set kernel args.
And I can execute multiple kernels.
When I'm done with it, I detach.
And that's basically telling GL that,
okay, CL is done with it.
Now you can use it.
it.
So in summary,
we have a new compute framework
that works across GPUs and CPUs.
It uses something we're
familiar with extensions.
We define numerical position
requirements so that there's a
consistent minimum error bound that's
guaranteed across compute devices.
And this will be the open standard
for compute on desktop platforms.
Well, let me introduce
Henry Moreton from NVIDIA.
He's a distinguished engineer in
the architecture group at NVIDIA.
And he's going to talk about GPUs and
OpenCL and how they're such a close fit.
Thank you.
Good morning.
So, I'm Henry Moreton, obviously.
And I have a few things I'd
like to talk with you about.
First of all,
I would like to give you some idea why
you should be interested in OpenCL.
And then we'll drop into a kind
of a brief discussion of CPUs
versus GPUs and some of their sort
of respective characteristics.
And then I'll spend the majority
of my time talking about the
GPU as an OpenCL processor.
The image at the bottom of the screen
is kind of a schematic view of a series
of processing clusters that are kind of
typical in the GPUs that we build today.
So, you know, why is this interesting?
You know, even at the outset, I mean,
this is the genesis of it.
This is the beginning of
OpenCL as a computing platform.
But it happens that OpenCL is
supported on all shipping NVIDIA GPUs.
Okay, that means that any GPU that ships
today is capable of supporting OpenCL.
Okay, so that's nice.
But in fact,
this has been the case for a while now.
There are 70 million OpenCL capable
GPUs already out there in the
marketplace in people's hands.
And that number is going up
at about 2 million a week.
So there's a non-trivial,
possibly a non-trivial user base.
Now as far as the Mac platform
or the Apple platform,
these are the current products that
have OpenCL capable GPUs in them.
from relatively high-end,
very high-end GPUs down to kind
of entry-level integrated systems.
Okay, so what about GPUs and CPUs?
The 8800GT I think is actually
what's shipping in the Mac Pro.
It has 112 cores and supports about
half a gigaflop and has some pretty
significant memory bandwidth.
If you compare that with kind
of a contemporary desktop CPU,
it has two cores,
it has a little bit less than a
tenth the floating point horsepower,
and rounding it has about a
tenth of the memory bandwidth.
So for very data parallel,
data intensive, bandwidth intensive,
floating point intensive workloads,
it's not as capable a platform.
Both of these support IEEE floating
point and I'll stress that,
and Afi actually was
fairly clear about this,
when I say IEEE floating point,
I'm referring to rounding modes.
The GPUs don't yet support
floating point exceptions,
those sorts of things,
so it's not the full IEEE standard.
It's important to understand that
they're both programmable using OpenCL,
which is actually great,
because one of the things that the
CPU enables is the use of OpenCL across
all Macs that are shipping today.
Okay, so what about the GPU as
an OpenCL processor?
[Transcript missing]
and I are going to talk about the TPCs.
The original name stems
from its graphics heritage.
Each TPC has a series of texture
filtering blocks and a texture L1 cache.
You can see it on the diagram.
And then they're further broken
down into multiple I called them
thread group processors internally.
In video we call them SMs which
stands for streaming multi-processor.
And a thread processing cluster
can have varying numbers of
these thread group processors.
On the right you see a
TPC composed of two of them.
On the left in sort of
smaller scale there are three.
And depending on the market
segment that you're going after,
one will be more
appropriate than the other.
The,
now each of these SMs or thread group
processors is made up of a collection
of scalar processors and there are
eight per thread processing group.
and David Let's see,
what else do we have here?
You can see the local memory
that Afi was talking about.
It's explicitly embodied
in the architecture.
It's a program managed cache.
We also, I think
and others.
I called them address qualifiers here.
Basically the hardware implements
both the private address space,
the local and global as well as
optimizing constant accesses.
Now, when I say it implements
the private address space,
there are instructions in the instruction
set that actually reference memory,
and then the hardware takes care of
mapping that to memory in an efficient
fashion in terms of interleaving the
memory references from all of the threads
that are executing in parallel so that
the memory accesses are efficient.
The same is true of
local and global memory,
and I'll talk a little bit
more about that in a moment.
So if you take and put
together a whole group of TPCs,
you can build up a chip.
And what we see here at the higher
level is a set of four TPCs.
which are then set on top of a
memory subsystem that's quite wide,
which is how we achieve the remarkable
memory bandwidth the system supports.
And you can also see on the left side in
gray this little block that says atomic.
So the language supports
atomic operations on memory.
And we implement those in what
we call fixed function hardware,
which sits very,
very close to the memory.
So that the read-modify-write
of the atomic operation
can be extremely efficient.
It will also note that
all of the bulk of the,
let's see, how do I describe this?
The host CPU is connected
to the GPU via PCIe,
but everything else in
this diagram is on die,
with the exception of perhaps
multiple gigabytes of memory.
So given that,
we can build a variety of different
platforms by incorporating different
numbers of TPCs and different
numbers of memory partitions.
So you can scale the
bandwidth of a product,
you can scale the compute capabilities
of the product depending on
your point in the marketplace.
So going back to the Mac configurations
that we were talking about earlier,
We have ranging from
130 gigaflops up to 504.
And you can see the varying numbers
of SPs in these different products.
These are all fairly powerful machines,
but there's still a wide range of
performance from the bottom to the top.
Okay, so what's, you know,
I talked a little bit about
the kinds of things that we've
implemented in the GPU in terms of
providing direct support for OpenCL.
What other sort of attributes are there?
What's interesting?
Well, one of the really critical and
extremely valuable attributes
of OpenCL and our architecture,
frankly, is that there's a transparent
scaling in terms of performance
across the product lines.
You can take the same piece of
code and run it efficiently on
a single TPC low-end system.
That's what this 8SPM GPU,
we call the motherboard GPUs,
a relatively low-end machine.
You can take that same piece of code.
And run it on even conceivably a dual
GPU system that has 256 processors and
supports about a teraflop of performance.
And the code will just run faster.
I mean, it isn't, you know,
perfectly magical.
I mean,
there are some limitations to scaling.
But one of the wonderful things
about this is when we ship a new
product that has higher performance,
has more cores, your application,
assuming that at least some of
your application developers,
just runs faster without
any effort on your part.
Another attribute,
actually flipping back to this for
just a second to clarify or kind of
illustrate why this comes about is,
Afi had mentioned the thread group.
So the thread group is the unit
of execution that's guaranteed
to execute at any given instant.
And those thread groups run on
these thread group processors.
And you might have a machine with
a single thread group processor
or you might have a machine with,
say, 32 or 64 thread group processors.
Because there's no dependency
among thread groups,
we can run them serially or we can
run them all in parallel and that's
where this scaling comes from.
Okay.
Another attribute on the GPU side is
that we support thousands of threads.
And I mean it very literally,
thousands of threads.
Now, what is that, you know,
what is that bias?
Well, you can use a very,
very sort of deep workload to hide
the latency of compute operations.
For example, if you perform some costly,
say you perform a sign function
or a multiply add that has maybe
10 or 20 clocks of latency.
and others.
While that is grinding
through the machine,
I can run ten other threads to hide
the latency of that operation so that
we never have trouble with dependent
operations on the GPU or rarely do.
The same holds for memory accesses.
As Afi mentioned,
in current shipping GPUs,
there are few memory caches.
There is a memory cache that sits behind
the constant accesses and I'll talk a
little bit more about that in a moment.
But accesses to global memory
go all the way out to the DRAMs.
And it is by having hundreds and
literally thousands of threads that we
can hide the latency of memory access.
So, okay, thousands of threads,
that's great.
One of the things that we've done
in the design of our processors
is to make sure that the threads
are extremely lightweight.
You can imagine that if you
have a thousand threads or
tens of thousands of threads,
the threads have to be very lightweight.
The threads are all managed in hardware.
They're created, scheduled,
and even the synchronization
operations among threads
are all managed in hardware.
So there's no visible overhead
to the application for these
very large numbers of threads.
Okay.
Now the hardware also, you know,
in terms of the way we design hardware,
we look at the kind of typical operations
that are being performed by applications
and optimize the hardware to make
those operations as fast as possible.
So one of the things that
you often see in a program,
a kernel, as Afi was describing, is that
All of the threads that are
executing along are often,
in fact, the vast majority of the time,
they're at the same program counter.
They're executing the same instruction.
So we optimize that.
If a
If a wavefront of SPs all reads
from the same memory location,
all reads the same instruction,
it does it in a single clock.
If, on the other hand,
some of the threads within that
wavefront take the if path and some
of the threads take the else path,
it takes two clocks.
Or it takes two
instruction memory fetches.
So we make the common case go
extremely fast and we make the
other cases go as fast as possible.
We're sort of providing for
the right trade-off in terms of
the instruction cache design.
Because ports into an instruction
cache are expensive and the
caches tend to grow roughly
linearly with the number of ports.
We also optimize the accesses
to the local memory as well as
global memory in the sense that
Typically,
threads will access a series of
consecutive locations in memory.
So what the hardware does is it
coalesces all of those requests
into sort of one cache line fetch.
And if, because of your algorithm,
it has slightly less structure,
if they access multiple cache lines,
we take exactly as many clocks as
there are cache lines referenced.
And the hardware takes care
of managing all of that.
So there's no need for the
programmer to deal with creating
masks to perform a vector load but
mask off the elements that they
don't want to actually be loaded.
So none of that overhead in terms of
lane management falls to the programmer.
So not only do you not
have to program it,
but it's also dramatically
more efficient.
Now, as far as the constant accesses.
Afi had mentioned that it's very
beneficial to identify regions
of memory that are read-only and
also regions of memory that are
dominated by a large number of threads
accessing the same memory location.
It happens that in graphics hardware,
the heritage of the constant
cache comes from the transform
and lighting engines of like eight
years ago because in those engines,
there was this chunk of memory
which held matrices for transforming
vertices and every thread that
was executing was going to access
the same coefficient every clock.
It happens that that kind of
characteristic memory access pattern
shows up in memory image processing
operations but in actually a very,
very wide variety of compute loads.
So what we do is optimize for that.
However, if there's some renegade
thread within a wave front,
a group of threads that are
executing all along at the same time,
if it goes off and reads
from some other location,
the hardware manages that gracefully.
It simply takes another clock, typically,
to read this other memory location.
But again, it's all managed in hardware
on behalf of the application,
so there's no additional compiler
or programming necessary to
get the programming running.
to get the performance there.
And then finally, obviously we have huge
amounts of bandwidth.
And we can stream data from the
DRAM onto the chip into local memories,
into registers,
and operate on it at a sustained
rate such that you can keep all of
the compute units fully occupied
during the execution of a kernel.
[Transcript missing]
You should understand that our GPUs
in OpenCL were designed together.
I've spent a great deal of time at Apple,
literally a couple of hours a week.
Fortunately,
they're not too far from campus.
Our campus, that is.
I think it should be apparent,
if you haven't figured this out already,
that the GPUs are a tremendous
platform for running OpenCL.
They're extremely efficient.
If the workload is appropriate,
you get great performance.
and you get,
in terms of absolute performance,
as you move up the product line,
you get sort of rewarded for
moving up the product line
with even better performance.
Also, in terms of efficiency,
and this is,
depending on what environments
you're working in,
a really critical issue.
They have, they're extremely efficient
from the perspective of
what we call perf per watt.
One of our design criteria when
building GPUs is to optimize the
performance delivered against
the power consumed because,
you know, if you,
If you have a laptop,
you don't want it to get too hot.
You need to be able to cool
the devices that are inside it.
And it turns out that power consumption,
battery life, thermal dissipation,
all of these things kind of
determine what you can get
away with in a given platform.
And then finally, to revisit the open
standard aspect of OpenCL,
it will be supportable
across all of our products.
So the pictures across the bottom of
the slide kind of are exemplary of
the various product lines from NVIDIA.
And we plan to continue to support,
to continue to ship
OpenCL capable machines.
And I, that's it.
Our, that's all I had today.
Our next speaker is Kevin.
Kevin Quehnesson: Thank you.
Thanks.
So hi and thanks.
So you learn about OpenCL,
it's a very cool and
very exciting technology.
So you might want to do your
OpenCL development in your usual
development environment such as
Xcode or whatever you would prefer.
But there's this great tool on the U.S.
called Quartz Composer that can help you.
So Quartz Composer basically can be
seen as a visual programming environment
that -- so it's pretty much a graph
that organizes a processing flow
where each of the nodes of this graph
is a patch that takes some inputs,
do some processing and
returns some outputs.
and so Quartz Composer is used for
doing graphics animation or image
processing or compositing pipelines
and also data visualization.
But the great thing about Quark's
Composer is that most of the time these
things are done with no code at all.
and so for those of you
OpenCL developer who wants to know,
learn about OpenCL,
learn about a language and discover
that or go further or explore
what OpenCL can do for you,
CrossComposer is a great place
to look at because it will handle
all what you don't want to handle.
For instance,
OpenGL attachments for drawing
or vertex buffer object texture,
texture caching for OpenGL context
and also the OpenCL program setups
and device setups and so on.
So you just go inside CrossComposer
and you have an application
where you can directly,
simply go and type your kernel
code and start playing and
interfacing with other patches.
So another great thing
about Cross Composer is
that it integrates all the,
most of the OS technologies.
So for instance, QuickTime, CoreImage,
CoreMedia, CoreAudio and so on.
So you can use and leverage
these OS technologies in
your OpenCL development,
for instance,
as inputs to your kernels or
as environments to visualize or
to better explore and present
the result of a simulation.
So Quast Composer adds OpenCL support.
And so what it means is we
have an OpenCL kernel patch
that's simple as just one patch,
so one of these processing nodes
that's... And in this patch you can
write OpenCL kernel and Quast Composer
will automatically parse this kernel,
find its argument and understand
what are the input ports,
the output ports,
and automatically populates the
patch so that you can have some
abstract processing units that you
can insert in some processing flows
and some Quast Composer composition.
and so that's very easy.
You open Cross Composer,
you create an OpenCL kernel
patch and right there,
without having to set up anything else,
you can start doing some OpenCL and start
leveraging Cross Composer to visualize
the results to eventually go pretty far.
So we'll show that in a demo in a second.
So one other great advantage
of Cross Composer is that
everything is at runtime.
So you don't need to build and
run whenever you make a change in
the kernel or change somewhere.
You can simply go in the setting
of the badge and inspect the
kernel code and as you change,
as you type in the kernel,
Cross Composer will automatically call
CL to recompile the program in the
background so that your simulation or
whatever processing in OpenCL you're
doing will pick up the change at the
simulation or where the processing goes.
So I'm going to demonstrate that
right now on the demo machine.
So here I'm going to open
in-course composer here.
So this N-Body demo that you've
been seeing previously in the show.
So you have 16,000 particles, 16,384.
And here are the composition look.
So you have the antibody kernel
which is here and simply the
result which is the position,
the output of that kernel is
passed into a renderer that
will simply render that thing.
Render the result of
the OpenCL simulation.
And that's as simple as it can be,
as simple as it is.
And Quartz Composer also provides
you with patch to interact with
the visualization so you can very
easily do some rotation like that.
And so let me show you now the
settings of that OpenCL kernel.
So here I have all the code of the
kernel that is a copy and paste of the
OpenCL kernel from all the other demos.
So there's no translation to do.
Just paste that stuff in and it works.
And here I have a line that I commented
out that simply takes the time step
and multiplies it by a constant,
which is five.
So I can just uncomment that line
and immediately the simulation
at the current time picks that
up and goes five times faster.
So if I can comment that line up and
so we're back to the previous time.
So it's very easy as you go to change the
kernel as it goes and to see the results.
It's a very nice way without having
to build and run to iterate really
fast and to go to where you want to
go and probably further much faster.
So let me start the simulation again.
And show you other power of
CrossComposer is also that you have
access to all the CrossComposer
pipeline and other possibilities.
For instance, you can create very easily
this little UI that allows
you to change some parameters,
but you can also leverage
the CrossComposer pipeline to
create some interesting effects.
And so for instance here,
I'm going to create a trail of all this.
of all these particles over time.
So here you can see in
three dimension over 200,
so, n-body simulations stacked over
time and composited together.
So, Quast Composer is going
to handle everything,
the vertex buffer object
caching and the display,
so you don't have to
worry about anything.
So, you know, it's -- so let me put that
maybe later so you can -- oh.
So it's a very nice way to
leverage Quartz Composer to
go in some other direction.
So how it works is to
do that motion blur,
it's a simple, here I go,
and it's a simple queue patch that will
stack up 200 vertex buffer objects,
so 200 results of that simulation,
and then an iterator,
which is a patch that will
render what's contained within
that queue for all its elements.
So all the elements
contained in that queue,
so 200 times.
So here you have, so, or 90 times.
So here, for instance,
you have 200 vertex buffer objects
of 16,000 particles drawn in front of
you by Quartz Composer in real time.
So let me go back to the slide, please.
Can I go back to slides, please?
Thanks.
So more details on the
OpenCL kernel patch.
So by default,
the OpenCL kernel patch is going
to handle everything automatically.
So it's going to find out the outputs and
input ports from the kernel prototype.
It's going to figure out the thread
dimensions and the output dimensions,
so the dimensions of
the output arguments.
But you have the option
to override everything.
So you have the option in the settings
to override the local thread dimension,
all those things.
So by default, it's very simple,
but you can give all the
customization that you want.
So yet very powerful.
So we really want Chorus
Composer to be a very,
very good OpenCL development tool.
And so we added to the Chorus Composer
editor itself new functionalities
to make that support really optimal.
So in particular,
we added this ability to define a
global OpenCL kernel-- OpenCL kernel.
OpenCL program, sorry.
So what it means is that--so if you
have a kernel patch and you write an
OpenCL kernel within that kernel patch,
this code and this kernel will
be accessed by the patch itself.
But using this global code view,
you can write an OpenCL program,
so maybe multiple kernels,
and these kernels will be accessible
by every patch in the composition,
so will be shared.
So if you change the
kernel in the program,
it will be reflected
automatically to all the patches.
So that's a very nice way to have
a centralized-- a centralized
location for OpenCL development.
And so it allows you also to bring
in any sort of OpenCL code within
Chorus Composer and start using it
and leveraging in the composition.
So another thing we added
to Cross Composer is a new
patch specifically targeted
at OpenCL simulations.
So a simulation pretty much means
that I have a kernel that iterates
over time over the same objects.
For instance, position and velocity.
So in the NBody case, that's what we do.
We have position and velocity.
Each time we use the NBody kernels
to update that position and velocity.
So each time step.
But CrossComposer only have access
to a slice of that time step,
to a patch at a given time.
And so what we need is that so that
this patch can have at the next time
step in its inputs the result of this
same patch at the previous time step.
So at the previous execution
of the composition.
So we added a very powerful
feedback patch that allows you
to do that sort of feedback.
And so the feedback patch at
t=0 is simply a pass-through.
So we'll pass the arguments
coming on the left,
so on the input ports to the output ports
and pass it to the current output port.
So we have a kernel.
But at t different from 0,
so at t bigger than 0,
it will feedback the previous
outputs on the inputs of the patch.
So that allows you to do this
sort of evolution over time.
And it's very powerful.
It can also be used in iterators if you
want to iterate the same simulation or
the same processing at a given time step.
And so that allows you
to do a lot of things.
And so I'm going to show you
an example of the sort of
thing that we can do with that.
feedback badge.
So here I have a cloth.
So that's as simple as it is.
We use the feedback patch to
do some cloth simulation using
leveraging OpenCL in Quartz Composer.
And so you can play
with the cloth around,
you can move it.
It's kind of fun, it's kind of elastic,
but it's really nice.
So you can do all that stuff.
So the feedback is there used to
propagate the result over time,
but also at a given time step to iterate
the simulation over all the springs.
So here you have a set of points,
so there are springs.
And so to enforce these springs,
we use the feedback patch to
propagate over all the cloth.
So you can have fun.
So to import that image,
it's as simple as an image source
patch that will bring in the image.
And so you can simply put that,
so here's the composition,
as an image port on the
mesh and it's automatically
textured by Quartz Composer.
So in that composition,
just like in the N-body,
there's no code beyond the OpenCL.
the OpenCL code.
So here I can play because Quartz
Composer is integrated within the OS.
I can, for instance,
apply a core image effect on that
texture and it's composited and
everything very easily and you see
the alpha blending on the side.
Okay, and so to sum up,
so Quartz Composer is great to help
you visualize the result of an OpenCL,
OpenCL simulation, OpenCL kernel,
anything.
It's great to help you interact
with that visualization.
And as I showed you in the composition,
it's also great to understand
the different parts,
the different processing
parts of what's going on.
So, for instance,
you have the optimization step,
you have the flow, you have the--here the
position are updated and so on.
So you can understand what comes next
because of that graphical representation.
So the things are organized.
It's also great to help you communicate
your processing to other people.
You can also write notes in
the graph that allows you
to document what's going on.
So Quartz Composer is great to
leverage OS technology with no code.
So, as I demonstrate to you.
And so Quartz Composer
integrates technologies,
but it's also integrated in the OS.
It's integrated in Cocoa using QC view.
So you can take that composition,
put it in Xcode and have an
application out of it with,
again, with no code.
It's also integrated
within Core Animation using
QC composition layer.
And it can also be used as a pure
renderer in your application.
So without even any OpenGL,
pure OpenCL processing pipeline.
So you can use it in applications to
take some data and to return some data,
leveraging OpenCL while using
Quartz Composer to create
this graphical workflow.
And so the message is really that
Cross Composer can be this bridge that
takes OpenCL and brings it to new limits
and also that integrates it in new areas,
for instance,
applications or for instance some
very new possibilities there.
So the Cross Composer is
in the C so you can try it.
You can try the NBody example.
And we are having a session this
afternoon that will show you some
very nice things of the new things we
added in Cross Composer for the first
time in particular interactivity.
So in a very short amount of
time we're going to create some
interactive OpenCL for the browser.
And I'm going to show you an
example of what the kind of
synergy is between the two.
So this is a little bit of a demo
of what the cross-composer can
bring while bringing OpenCL into
other area in particular with this
ability to integrate by going to
a last demo to the demo machine.
So here I simply took this demo we're
going to bring this afternoon and added
the closed simulation to simulate...
to simulate some paper
or some paper claw thing.
So we just took this co-simulation,
wrapped it as a patch,
and then we don't have to worry
about what that patch contains,
and put that within that simulation.
And here's an example of what it can do.
So you can now, you know, give some,
you know, so it's a little elastic,
so it's not real paper, but, you know,
you can have some fun,
and so you can bring these things here,
and you know, take the other people,
and they grow automatically.
So all these things are
physically simulated using OpenCL.
So it takes OpenCL,
which is not only for scientists,
it's for everybody.
It's for everybody who wants to bring
new possibilities to their applications,
to whatever they want to,
they're working on, speed in sorting,
speed in visualization,
or new possibilities in, you know,
in things that you thought were fixed.
So for instance,
an image don't have to be on a quad.
It doesn't have to be on a quad.
It can be on this, on this claw thing.
And for instance, so, and here,
so you can simulate some real page curls.
So here we have some.
You know, a page curl going on.
So you don't have to fake the page
curl to try to find the function.
You can just take that image and say,
"Okay, let's do a page curl to
reveal what's beneath." Well,
that's all the things.
And then, oh, she's gonna,
and if I release,
the key is gonna drop down.
So, and, and, so to do that page curl,
literally what we just do,
we just take the two
corners and put them up,
and that's all what you need.
And so that's also what bring,
what the simulation brings to you,
the fact that you don't have to worry
about the functions and all the things,
because you have the simulation,
because now it's abstracted.
Now, with that patch,
you can leverage it to do lots of,
lots of very powerful things,
but very easily,
because you have all the things which is,
which is hidden.
So, and, and that's it.
So can I, can we go back to slides,
please?
So that was this little extra picture.
So we're having a session this afternoon.
Please come if you want to learn
more about the technologies and
about the new features in Quark's
Composer to do these sort of things.
And now I'm going to bring
back Jeff on stage for Q&A.